I used to live and do research and
engage in humanitarian work in northern
Laos specifically the northwest of Laos
an area where in many ways the map was
wiped clean by the American army so the
clock was reset the US Army there the
northwest they didn't rely so much on
aerial bombardment they didn't want so
much on airplanes to destroy villages
they were able to use more soldiers on
foot with the all-mighty Zippo lighter
going from village to village and
forcing all of the population to leave
and burning down the buildings that
remain and so on so there was a
militarily enforced mass migration that
in most areas where I was specifically
northwest of Laos reduced the population
to zero now in some cases those people
were moved into refugee camps in some
cases that has moved into larger cities
several days march away and yet there
were actually cases where they were put
into tents and massacred I've seen some
documents or evidence of that I guess
probably just because they became
inconvenient for the US Army to to
relocate nevertheless this relates to
the topic of this video in the following
rather dynamic way when ask yourself
Isaac when Isaac was making his
impassionate or is impassioned argument
in favor of quote unquote race realism
in favor of you know a racist view of
how DNA determines intelligence I
pointed out to them that there are
circumstances in the world where you can
compare two villages on the map in this
area of northern Laos where everything
was destroyed and then they started
rebuilding the village at the same point
in history like after the war with the
Americans ended the school was built in
two villages at the same time um you
know people started to emerge from
illiteracy and absolute poverty at the
same time economic development happened
at the same pace like for example they
both had no electricity and then
received electricity at the same time
where really you had about the same
advantages and disadvantages over maybe
a 50-year period even and
you could claim that DNA was really a
decisive or major variable in separating
the two villages
now the ethnic groups of Laos do belong
to completely different language
families and there are really
significant ethnic differences between
people all of whom may be referred to as
as Lotion especially in that part of
Laos it is very very very ethnically
diverse and is very linguistically
diverse and culturally diverse so you
could look at a village that is entirely
populated by the acha the a cover one
ethnic group and you can compare them to
a village of people who are Hmong Mong
is spelled HM Ong you could look at a
village that is tightly and compare it
to a village that is Thai dang you could
compare people who are part of the Mon
Khmer language family they are very
ethnically different from the Thai
Cateye language family and all living
close together in the same climate with
broadly speaking many of the same
economic advantages and disadvantages so
I said to him if you or any of these
people were sincerely interested in the
relationship between ethnicity and ni q
why wouldn't you be looking at this sort
of circumstance why would you be engaged
in the the insincere arguments from my
perspective insincere arguments that you
are looking at you know Georgia in the
United States of America or Texas
what-have-you and pretending that
socio-economic factors and indeed
explicitly political factors do not
explain what you call the quote unquote
achievement gap for things like home
ownership in the United States America
if you guys don't know you can just
google redlining redlining is a term
it's a simple term that combines a
pretty complex phenomenon that
ultimately comes down to federal
government policy united states america
but includes fact that black people
united states were forced to live in
ghettos that they were not able to buy
property that white people were able to
buy that they were not able to get bank
loans to own a home these are political
decisions ultimately made by the
president United States of America
that's where they all trace back to the
directives and carried out by government
functionaries and then ultimately
implemented by banks and properties for
homeland corporations at the end of
World War two look at the benefit
package that a white War veteran
received very often directly linked to
free education and housing and house
ownership was provided for white
soldiers in World War two
the opportunities they had and then look
at the situation of a black War veteran
African American for veterans at the end
of World War two it's a really stark
difference and this is not ancient
history this is this is history that
directly impacts my generation I'm 40
years old
both way and I know I know this impacted
my own family and so forth you talking
about a situation of very dynamic
inequality very directly linked when
talking about African Americans and what
European Americans didn't say it's
America and it's even more observing you
want to talk about indigenous Canadians
so the Cree the ajeeb the Mohawk the
Inuit you know I really did engage them
Socratic like how much do you know about
the political history of what an Indian
Reservation is like economically and
governmentally I remember asking him
specifically like you do realize that
the school on an Indian Reservation is
not provided by the provincial
government like you realize like
legislatively and politically like there
are differences in education that that
both exist on paper ahead of reality and
of course that's changed a lot in the
last 50 years we are not in a position
in Canada to pretend that we're
comparing people in a laboratory where
all variables other than DNA have been
controlled
now it's also true that if you did this
kind of research in northern Laos where
there are there are fewer uncontrolled
variables where you can say look the
American army came in here and
completely demolished everything and
then the Communist Party resettled these
people in villages basically tribal
villages of separate ethnicities
speaking separate languages they all
built their first school at the same
time they dug the first water well at
the same time they started farming rice
what have you you could intentionally
design a study or you pick a cluster of
villages that are as similar as possible
where you try to get rid of other
variables so for example you only pick
villages that farm rice and you exclude
villages that farm pineapples or some
other crop you pick a bunch of villages
that are absolutely as similar as
possible in every way one of the main
ones would be access to a highway access
to electricity these kinds of things you
try to narrow it down as much as
possible so that you could look at
genetic differences between these people
and still you know the role of DNA in
this I'll say a little bit more but why
I am so skeptical would be minuscule
compared to the significance of language
nila Isaak again is someone who has none
of this experience he's someone who
speaks out of crass ignorance to some
extent and he someone who speaks out of
an echo chamber of you know fascist
racist apologists who just recycle
talking points from J Phillipe Rushton
and the bell curve and what-have-you
try to take scientific racism and make
it seem respectable these in these
contexts um you know why am I so
skeptical about ethnicity in DNA I'm
going to digress at this point against
it to say this um around the Year 1965
it would have been very easy for people
to generalize about Chinese people's
ability to drive a car about in the
United States I mean Chinese Americans
how well they could drive a car how well
they do on driving tests and it would be
completely absurd to claim that this was
because of a genetic hereditary property
in Chinese people around 1965 that
impaired their ability to drive a car
very obviously around the Year 1965
you could look at the conditions Chinese
people had grown up in in China like
their access to a car or how much how
many of them really had grown up with a
car and then even if they had a car
what type of car they drove in what
conditions what kind of roads what kind
of laws and then that these are people
who made the transition maybe from
growing up in China between 9
forty and 1965 and they immigrated to
the United States of America and passed
a driving test and they'll have to deal
with totally different road conditions
having a driver's license statistically
speaking is a very powerful predictor
for economic outcomes and even how well
you do on your driver's license and one
of the main excuses given for racism
like the IQ is the idea that IQ has
statistically powerful predictive power
for how much money you're going to earn
a lot of that is negative in the
following sense if you have a driver's
license you can access employment you
can drive to a job interview if you have
a driver's license it means you're not
visually impaired you're not blind means
you don't have a range of physical
disabilities that would impair you there
are a lot of things excluded just by
performing well on a driving test you
know you probably don't have verbal and
facial tics and twitches or nervous
condition that would prevent you from
from driving and that would also impair
your ability to be economically
successful in our society most of the
time it would that would make it much
more difficult for you to be an economic
success story so there's a very very
powerful link between having a driver's
license and economic success it's also
true that the type of people who learn
to drive young and learn to drive well
are probably people who grow up with
privilege etc etc people who didn't just
immigrate from China
now another another culture I know what
by the way I speak reading write Chinese
I used to live in Cambodia where I
studied the Cambodian language you had a
lot of immigrants coming from Cambodia
to the United States of America and
specifically coming from refugee camps
so if you told me there is a difference
in how well those people perform on
their driving tests that they that
Cambodians perform more poorly in
getting a driver's license or even that
they are worse drivers the Unites States
America I can say right away of course
it's not genetic of course it's not DNA
have you been to Cambodia even worse
have you been to a Cambodian refugee
camp do you know where these people come
from and even if someone makes the
further argument that they want to
believe driving ability how will you do
on a driver's license that it's heredity
because it will look on the second
generation the children of these people
who came from Cambodia came from refugee
camps they also perform worse well
obviously this is whether you call this
culture or Pico culture it's gonna be do
a less or extent but yeah maybe if you
grow up with a father who's a terrible
driver and who normalizes really poor
driving because he grew up driving in a
totally different culture totally
different system of roads and convention
different cars and everything else
really really different situation
growing up driving in Cambodia sure
maybe there's some influence there the
passes on obviously we were talking
about the status of African Americans
United States you're talking about a
situation of dynamic enforced inequality
not random inequality um that was
created and sustained by very clear
government policies including redlining
including what happened at the end of
World War two in terms of veterans
benefits and so on and including yeah
slavery have you heard of that and what
happened in the process of reparations
and resettlement and integration of
black people into its what society a
very slow process indeed so it didn't
happen overnight with the end of the
United Civil War so sure there are a
long term knock-on effects in economic
and educational attainment from that
history that are completely obvious to
everyone who has any sincere interest in
the social sciences and he was not
trying to cynically weaponize these
differences and attribute them to DNA
now why do I take this approach it is
because very fundamentally I am an IQ
skeptic I regard the IQ test as being
just as meaningless as a driver's
license and in the same sense it is
meaningful precisely at the low end of
the spectrum iq is really important in a
legal context of establishing are you
responsible for committing murder are
you responsible see there are people who
are severely mentally disabled mentally
impaired IQ tests can be very important
in kind
where the government will give someone
benefits if they're so stupid and so
mentally impaired that they really can't
hold a job or they struggle to even buy
groceries of themselves so there are
gradations of intelligence at the low
end that are quite important to be able
to test empirically by the same token
there are gradations at the low end that
the driving driver's license tests are
that's what they're established to
measure what we really want to know is
are you a danger to yourself and others
on the road a driver's license test does
not establish your brilliance it does
not establish how how excellent a driver
you could be at the upper end are you a
stunt car driver
are you a racing driver can you perform
extraordinarily well under pressure the
whole test is set up it's calibrated and
intended to regulate and enforce at the
low end of the spectrum and that's where
it's meaningful but if you know anything
about social science distal University
degree in political science Isaac has
absolutely no education whatsoever he
doesn't know how to analyze social
scientist exceed ever done this kind of
computation and doesn't have this done
at bagram education just by excluding
the people at the low end of the of the
range the people who are for example
blind that will itself produce the
statistical artifact of a person with a
driver's license and a person with a
high score on their driving test being
more financially and economically
successful in every way at every stage
of their life
now of course also being born wealthy is
going to result in you in better on your
driving test statistically speaking on
this size on the scale of a society of
100 million people people who are born
wealthier have access to opportunities
like owning a car that makes it easier
for them to practice driving learning
drive they have the money to hire a
professional teacher and go to school
they have all kinds of advantages
because of their wealth that will show
up in the driver's license test whether
they just barely pass or pass really
well they have advantages over our
Cambodian immigrants especially at
Cambodian immigrant who comes from a
refugee camp at every stage of that
process and indirectly their driver's
license test
is gonna map to those other scores
outcomes and achievements so in the same
way we talked about the IQ test yeah
sure there's gonna be a relationship
between performance on the IQ test and
real-world both arms but you know
there's also gonna be a pretty strong
correlation between how wealthy your
parents were and how wealthy you are
right is anyone in any doubt about this
and there's a pretty strong correlation
between you know what happened to your
grandfather
at the end of World War two for me
imagine it's only my grandfather both of
my grandparents served in World War two
so the deal they got in terms of
education and benefits my two
grandfather's at the end of World War
two completely explains my socioeconomic
status today a hundred percent right
it's not distant so the way black people
in America were treated at the end of
World War two is an incredibly powerful
of formative factor for their status
today and the history of segregation
redlining ghettoization black people
being unable to get a loan to buy in on
a house being able to unable to buy a
house it's in a white only neighborhood
property violence being openly racist in
excluding black people access to
employment whether or not they can even
have certain classes of job access to
education cetera
oh these things if you just talk about
the end of World War two to the present
of course they improved dramatically in
the decade of the 1980s the status of
African Americans in the 1980s improved
absolutely fabulously the decade of the
1980s compared to the decade of the
1950s there is no comparison things
improved amazingly it's also true that
if you're a refugee who moves from
Cambodia to Long Beach California
materially your life brews in all these
ways but nevertheless there were
knock-on effects for yourself and maybe
even for your children in how well you
can drive a car how well you can compete
in this economy instead of exam so
coming back to the question of northern
Laos of small villages that could be
more closely comparable in terms of
their history where you could be looking
more at the effect of DNA on
intelligence it's also true
that the effect of DNA is going to be
trivial absolutely trivial compared to
language right now two factors work with
language and religion okay so even if we
have this study we pick villages that
are perfectly comparable same level of
education same level access to
electricity farm everything everything
is the same guess what Thai do people
grow up speaking Thai li Hmong people
grow up speaking Hmong Mong kamae people
grow up speaking one of them home
combine languages let's say Kumu khmu
okay so let's say those that's what
we're comparing you don't think that
factor alone makes a difference in what
they can read and what they do read like
the difference growing up in these three
profoundly different language families
without even getting into the psychology
of language acquisition like to what
extent does growing up speaking Chinese
actually change the way you perceive
reality versus growing up speaking ocean
that's an interesting question but on a
shallower level what can you read in the
Kumu language growing up right even
radio so let's say all three of those
languages you grow up listening to the
radio in your own language they didn't
they didn't grow up listening to the
same things I mean you okay how about
religion so let's say we're talking
about Hmong people who are Christian
time view people who are terrified of
Buddhists and Camus people who still
practice tribal animism religion we
don't really have a ancestor worship
ghost warships pure worship the tiding
also very animistic organized religion
the akka very complex system of animism
Kovak is not you don't think that that's
going to make a difference
much more profound in their daily life
and the perception reality in what kind
of intelligence they cultivate and what
they do with it can these differences
even be captured by an IQ test I you
know I don't think in a meaningful sense
they'd be captured by a driving test
either this
also part of my my criticism of the IQ
test I don't think the IQ test tells us
what it is that we want to know so guys
this video is past 20 minutes I could
say more not a lot of people express
sincere interest in hearing me explain
what it was that I discussed when I
confronted ask yourself Isaac about his
racist views to put it that way it is
very clear to me that Isaac is a guy who
was initially influenced by Jay Phillipe
Rushton and especially a debate that
took place between Jay Phillipe Rushton
and David Suzuki these are people who
are famous in Canada but they are not
really so famous the United States or
Europe and that debate is on YouTube I
just mentioned David Suzuki is an idiot
he really is
however Jay Phillipe Rushton is a racist
who has been so thoroughly discredited
that if you even just look at his
Wikipedia article it'll be obviously
what did I think even look into this for
five minutes and the answer is no he did
not
Isaac was really influenced by seeing
this debate between Jay Phillipe Rushton
and David Suzuki he lived in an echo
chamber of people who reinforced his
attitudes getting again and that only
ended when he became friends with a
medical doctor called dr. avi dr. avi I
saw the chilling effect that dr. avi
really put him in put him in check on
this now once it became Browns doctor he
suddenly got much more circumspect and
evasive but what his views on race in IQ
were but he got into a pattern that's
easily refutable isaac of bullying
people by saying to them
well you can't possibly believe that IQ
is equally distributed throughout all
ethnic groups for the same reasons that
you can't possibly believe that height
is equally distributed throughout all
the racial groups and then you proceeded
with a series of kind of bullying and
really false and quite easy to to refute
arguments about race and IQ from there
Isaac is a weak willed weak minded
person who has no sincere interest in
the use of philosophy reason or logic
for his own benefit for he
he's benefit or anybody's benefited he's
only interested when it makes him feel
powerful and strong and influential and
smart and important and he becomes
afraid of it as soon as it challenges
him as soon as it makes him feel weak
and humble and that he's done something
wrong and that he needs to go and read a
book so it was very challenging him for
him to hear from me that he lives in a
country that's built on genocide that
there's this whole important history
literally right under his feet of why
Canada is the way it is and why the
status and situation of our native
peoples is so unequal and that no you
absolutely cannot explain the current
situation of the Cree in a way
within Canada in terms of their quote
unquote genetic inferiority this is it's
this is not just racist it's false it's
easily refuted and it's insane now I
have to give him credit he was cordial
he heard this and he responded and the
discourse went on and on at some depth
and some length and I think it's very
meaningful that the final conclusion
this came to what it revealed in a
Socratic sense what was what was
disambiguated in the conversation was
that Isaac said of himself that his
fundamental concern is that Canada
should stay the same that in its ethnic
composition he did not want Canada to
change and he said I mean this is part
of his justifying that he's not racist
he doesn't just mean that he wants
Canada made dominated by white white
Christians but he said that he wants
Canada to basically retain the same
composition where some small percentages
is indigenous I guess he doesn't want
that to increase he'd also he's also
saying that he's not racist in the sense
that it's not that he personally wants
to see the indigenous people disappear
yeah well thanks not much of a bunch of
a concession what I pointed out to him
in response to that was that that is
fundamentally conservative I said well
your position is altered is all you're
saying is that ultimately this is the
status quo that you know and that you're
willing to defend it that you want to
uphold it I said my situation is that I
am fundamentally a dissident I am very
dissatisfied with
than what it is in many ways including
the legacy of colonialism and genocide
and including racism believe many many
other things between insanity
I am so dissatisfied with Canadian
society that I regard immigration and
changes in the ethnic composition of
Canada changes in the language spoken in
Canada I regard that positively just
because there is at least the
possibility of radical and fundamental
change in Canada
I am so dissatisfied with Canadian
society I'm interested in that radical
and fundamental change even if it makes
things worse so I have no illusions that
Chinese people are superior to people I
speak reading my Chinese but if you ask
me do I think Chinese immigration to
Canada is a good thing my fundamental
reason for thinking is a good thing is
that at least it raises new questions it
results in new openness new challenges
and the possibility of positive change
in a country that has a political system
that I despise as a system of education
that I despise it has a system that I
would like to see disrupted and
challenged and to take on new directions
so that is not how how Isaac feels and
Isaac was led down a path first through
flattery because these racist views as
presented by people like Jay Foley brush
done as presented by Steven Pinker as
presented by Sam Harris they are
fundamentally flattering to him we had a
funny situation the other day here you
may have noticed just yesterday I
uploaded a video with a guy named
Mohammed Mohammed's family is from the
greater Palestine area mostly Jordan but
he's his family history as part of the
Palestinian experience and now with the
rise of Israel mmm disrupted and
destroyed the civilization that existed
there before um British Empire also has
a lot of the blame before it State of
Israel but whatever and I pointed out to
him we were talking about the politics
of Israel Palestine the British Empire I
said you know it's really pathetic that
we live in an era when I am considered
extraordinary for being opposed to
apartheid when I am a pole way it's
extraordinaire
I'm opposed to apartheid when it could
benefit me when for me as someone who's
definitely Jewish I could benefit from
this apartheid as it's sitting here on
the same couch here's Melissa unless
it's a white American who is not of
Jewish ancestry we don't think it's
remarkable that melissa is opposed to an
apartheid system that would benefit her
and that historically in the past did
benefit her people like her you know
point is back when there was a part-time
United States in America people like
Melissa benefited she has blue eyes more
blue okay hazel what do you go with okay
she prefers hazel to me they look blue
in bright light Bella blue anyway this
is uh this is a fair-skinned white
person of mixed European ancestry she
was one of the beneficiaries of that
system of apartheid but we completely
assume in a speck expect her to be
opposed to apartheid even when it
benefits her and yet it's remarkable
it's considered remarkable for me to
oppose apartheid one of the benefit me
Isaac and all the people like Isaac
it should not be remarkable it should
not be exceptional for people like you
to oppose scientific racism even when it
benefits you even when it's flattering
to you even when people like Steven
Pinker are telling you that you're
special and that you're intelligent
because of your blood you're not none of
us are